# NIDS

## A simple Network Intrusion Detection System (NIDS) created by Maxwell Reese, Mitchell Milander, and Blake Platt.

### one sentance discription

This NIDS captures packets, analyzes them, sends data to a dashboard, and alerts the user of any malicious traffic.

#### Aditional information

Similar to other independent IDS systems, the IDS will consist of four main modules: packet capture, traffic analysis, threat detection, and alert generation. Throughout development, the team will ensure their code stays organized and maintainable for future development. The application’s front-end will be implemented using React with system data stored in a SQL-based PostgreSQL database. Python will be extensively used for back-end processes. Key python libraries include Scapy for packet sniffing, pandas for network analysis, and re for hardcoded threat detection. Ideally, the project will also utilize scikit-learn for machine-learning-based anomaly detection. A stretch goal is to implement a SSH Honeypot to attract malicious traffic.


## Installation

Python 3.10+
Npcap installed
Npcap sdk

## Prerequisites

Docker

### Add-ons

N/A

### Installation Steps

Clone the github

## Functionality

cd into the folder with the ids code and test function. 
Run the IDS test bat whcih will show in terminal and open an elstic windown with alerts in the alert section
Connect to a hotspot so that you can run the ids on your own network, then you can run the ids real bat file which will run the ids on your network and show the packets as well as alerts if there is any

Npcap sniffs packets and relays results to a Qfyt ui

## Known Problems

Requires administrative privileges
High traffic volumes may impact performance
Detection is currently rule-based (limited ML integration)
Windows-dependent due to Npcap

## Additional Documentation
TODO: Provide links to additional documentation that may exist in the repo, e.g.,
* [Sprint reports](https://github.com/WSU-CPTS322-SP26/IDS/blob/2af636bd5e15bb4326fc570639b3dcf47da079a1/SPRINT_REPORT_1)
* [resources] (https://github.com/WSU-CPTS322-SP26/IDS/blob/2af636bd5e15bb4326fc570639b3dcf47da079a1/Resources.md)

## License

Boost Software License - Version 1.0 - August 17th, 2003

Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person or organization
obtaining a copy of the software and accompanying documentation covered by
this license (the "Software") to use, reproduce, display, distribute,
execute, and transmit the Software, and to prepare derivative works of the
Software, and to permit third-parties to whom the Software is furnished to
do so, all subject to the following:

The copyright notices in the Software and this entire statement, including
the above license grant, this restriction and the following disclaimer,
must be included in all copies of the Software, in whole or in part, and
all derivative works of the Software, unless such copies or derivative
works are solely in the form of machine-executable object code generated by
a source language processor.

THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR
IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY,
FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE, TITLE AND NON-INFRINGEMENT. IN NO EVENT
SHALL THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS OR ANYONE DISTRIBUTING THE SOFTWARE BE LIABLE
FOR ANY DAMAGES OR OTHER LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, TORT OR OTHERWISE,
ARISING FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER
DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE.
